Setup
Chess is played on a square board of eight rows (called ranks 
and denoted with numbers 1 to 8) and eight columns (called files and 
denoted with letters a to h) of squares. The colors of the sixty- 
four squares alternate and are referred to as "light squares" and 
"dark squares". The chessboard is placed with a light square at the 
right-hand end of the rank nearest to each player, and the pieces 
are set out as shown in the diagram, with each queen on its own 
color.

The pieces are divided, by convention, into white and black sets. The 
players are referred to as "White" and "Black", and each begins the 
game with sixteen pieces of the specified color. These consist of 
one king, one queen, two rooks, two bishops, two knights, and eight 
pawns.

Movement
White always moves first. After the initial move, the players 
alternately move one piece at a time (with the exception of 
castling, when two pieces are moved). Pieces are moved to either an 
unoccupied square or one occupied by an opponents piece, which is 
captured and removed from play. With the sole exception of en 
passant, all pieces capture opponent's pieces by moving to the 
square that the opponents piece occupies. A player may not make any 
move that would put or leave his king under attack. If the player to 
move has no legal moves, the game is over; it is either a checkmate
if the king is under attack or a stalemate if the king is not.
Each chess piece has its own style of moving. In the diagrams, the 
dots mark the squares where the piece can move if no other pieces 
(including ones own piece) are on the squares between the pieces 
initial position and its destination.

The king moves one square in any direction. The king has also a 
special move which is called castling and involves also moving a 
rook.

The rook can move any number of squares along any rank or file, but 
may not leap over other pieces. Along with the king, the rook is 
involved during the king's castling move.

The bishop can move any number of squares diagonally, but may not 
leap over other pieces.

The queen combines the power of the rook and bishop and can move any 
number of squares along rank, file, or diagonal, but it may not leap 
over other pieces.

The knight moves to any of the closest squares that are not on the 
same rank, file, or diagonal, thus the move forms an "L"-shape: two 
squares vertically and one square horizontally, or two squares 
horizontally and one square vertically. The knight is the only piece 
that can leap over other pieces.

The pawn may move forward to the unoccupied square immediately in 
front of it on the same file; or on its first move it may advance 
two squares along the same file provided both squares are 
unoccupied; or it may move to a square occupied by an opponents 
piece which is diagonally in front of it on an adjacent file, 
capturing that piece. The pawn has two special moves: the en passant 
capture and pawn promotion.

Pawns can optionally move two squares forward instead of one on 
their first move only. They capture diagonally, but they 
cannot capture with their normal move. Pawns also are 
involved in the special capture called en passant.

Castling
Once in every game, each king is allowed to make a special move, 
known as castling. Castling consists of moving the king two squares 
along the first rank toward a rook (which is on the player's first 
rank) and then placing the rook on the last square the king 
has just crossed. Castling is permissible only if all of the 
following conditions hold.
Neither of the pieces involved in castling may have been previously 
moved during the game.
There must be no pieces between the king and the rook.
The king may not be in check, nor may the king pass through squares 
that are under attack by enemy pieces, nor move to a square where it 
is in check.

En passant
When a pawn advances two squares from its starting position and 
there is an opponents pawn on an adjacent file next to its 
destination square, then the opponents pawn can capture it en 
passant (in passing), and move to the square the pawn passed over. 
However, this can only be done on the very next move, otherwise the 
right to do so is forfeit. For example, if the black pawn has just 
advanced two squares from g7 (initial starting position) to g5, then 
the white pawn on f5 may take it via en passant on g6 (but only on 
white's next move).

Promotion
Main article: Promotion (chess)
When a pawn advances to the eighth rank, as a part of the move it is 
promoted and must be exchanged for the players choice of queen, 
rook, bishop, or knight of the same color. Usually, the pawn is 
chosen to be promoted to a queen, but in some cases another piece is 
chosen; this is called underpromotion. In the diagram on the right,
the pawn on c7 can be advanced to the eighth rank and be promoted 
to an allowed piece. There is no restriction placed on the piece 
that is chosen on promotion, so it is possible to have more pieces 
of the same type than at the start of the game (for example, two 
queens).

Check (chess)
When a king is under immediate attack by one or two of the 
opponents pieces, it is said to be in check. A response to a check 
is a legal move if it results in a position where the king is no 
longer under direct attack (that is, not in check). This can involve 
capturing the checking piece; interposing a piece between the 
checking piece and the king (which is possible only if the attacking 
piece is a queen, rook, or bishop and there is a square between it 
and the king); or moving the king to a square where it is not under 
attack. Castling is not a permissible response to a check. The 
object of the game is to checkmate the opponent; this occurs when 
the opponents king is in check, and there is no legal way to remove 
it from attack. It is illegal for a player to make a move that would 
put or leave his own king in check.

End of the game
Stalemate if it is Black to move. It is not checkmate, and since 
Black cannot move, the game is a draw.
Although the objective of the game is to checkmate the opponent, 
chess games do not have to end in checkmate either player may 
resign which is a win for the other player. It is considered bad 
etiquette to continue playing when in a truly hopeless position. 
If it is a game with time control, a player may run out of time 
and lose, even with a much superior position. Games also may end 
in a draw (tie). A draw can occur in several situations, including 
draw by agreement, stalemate, threefold repetition of a position, 
the fifty-move rule, or a draw by impossibility of checkmate 
(usually because of insufficient material to checkmate). 
As checkmate from some positions cannot be forced in fewer than 
50 moves (such as in the pawnless chess endgame and two knights 
endgame), the fifty-move rule is not applied everywhere,
particularly in correspondence chess.

Time control
Besides casual games without any time restriction, chess is also 
played with a time control, mostly by club and professional players. 
If a players time runs out before the game is completed, the game 
is automatically lost (provided his opponent has enough pieces left 
to deliver checkmate). The duration of a game ranges from long games 
played up to seven hours to shorter rapid chess games, usually 
lasting 30 minutes or one hour per game. Even shorter is blitz 
chess, with a time control of three to fifteen minutes for each 
player, and bullet chess (under three minutes). In tournament play, 
time is controlled using a game clock that has two displays, one for 
each player's remaining time.